*Sampling Methods*
==================

There are four main sampling methods. One trait uniting them is that they are 'probability' sampling methods. This means that each 'sampling unit', which is a member, unit or case within the sampling frame that is sampled:

1.  Has a known probability of selection, and;
2.  Is sampled from the sampling frame using some form of randomisation.

This is distinguished from an 'observation unit' (an element) which is the most directly measured unit within a sample (e.g. a single person, a single school's enrolment, etc.). These two units can be identical depending on study design and sampling method.

All of the probability sampling methods covered integrate this in some form in their design. Beyond that, each is a unique method of sampling from a population. The goal of all methods is to produce a small sample that is very similar to the population. Different methods achieve a sample that is 'representative' with varying levels of efficiency.

The methods addressed are Simple Random Sampling (SRS), Systematic Sampling (SS), Proportionally Stratified Sampling (PSS) and Probability Proportional to Size Cluster Sampling (PPSCS).

Simple Random Sampling (SRS)
============================

This is often used as an introductory sampling method and is one the simplest in both theory and execution. The defining characteristic of SRS is that each sampling unit (i.e. 'member') within the sampling frame has an equal chance of selection. Take for example data of schools from the MySchool website. For such a study, both the primary sampling unit and the observation unit would be individual schools. These make up the sampling frame and would be the point of observation when collecting data for variables of interest. Each school has a case row in the sampling frame and all variables are measured on a school by school basis.

In probability sampling methods the chance of selection is known for all sampling units. With SRS these chances are equal for all units. This means that any sample taken from a sampling frame is equally likely to occur as each other possible theoretical sample.

In theory, any random selection of sample elements could be described as a SRS. The actual process of achieving such a random selection is more complicated. There are several ways to accomplish this. One widely used method involves assigning each unit within the sample frame a number sequentially, typically from 1 up to the very last unit in the frame (i.e. 1 to *N*). The order of units within the sampling frame when this number is assigned is not important. Following this a randomisation mechanism is used to produce random numbers. This mechanism can be physical (e.g. numbered balls chosen by a lotto machine), pre-prepared (e.g. a table of random numbers read in some order) or electronic (e.g. computerised random number generator). Additional random numbers are generated whenever numbers exceed the limits of the sampling frame (1 to *N*) or the same number is repeated.

The random numbers are matched with the numbers that were sequentially assigned to each sampling unit in the sampling frame. Each matching unit is considered part of the SRS and is taken from the frame with or without replacement. This method thereby selects a sample at random from the frame with equal probability of selection for all members and theoretical samples.

SRS has two main disadvantages. First, it is prone to human error and is not time/cost-efficient when executed manually for large samples. Therefore large SRS are typically executed on a computer with statistical software (e.g. `sample()` in R). This criticism could arguably be applied to most sampling methods. Second, it requires a sampling frame of the entire population of units. Once this difficult requirement is met no additional knowledge of the population is required. Other sampling methods need additional knowledge of the population and integrate it into the sampling methodology.

One final characteristic of SRS is the use of this method as a scale against which more complex sampling methods can be compared. The variance associated with a more complex sampling method of a particular sample size (i.e. '*k* observation units') can be divided by the variance of equivalent SRS estimates. This produces a ratio know as Design Effect (DEFF) which describes the degree to which the variability of the complex sample departs from that of a SRS. As a ratio of variance over variance, a DEFF of 2 means that the complex sample in the numerator has twice the variability as an SRS and would need twice the sample size to produce standard errors typical of that SRS. The square root of DEFF is another ratio called DEFT, and a DEFT of 2 means that confidence intervals are twice the size as they would be for a SRS. These statistics are useful in sampling method comparisons.

Systematic Sampling (SS)
========================

In SS the first case is chosen at random and then every *k*<sup>th</sup> (i.e. sampling interval) case is chosen thereafter. For example, a random number generator might select the 5<sup>th</sup> case, followed by the researcher skipping a prescribed number of cases in the sampling frame and taking the next case. Through this method a SS will consist entirely of every *k*<sup>th</sup> case in the sampling frame. The *k* is calculated by dividing the total sampling frame (a.k.a. population *N*) by the required sample size *n (k = N / n)*.

For SS in the MySchool example the primary sampling unit and the observation unit is the same as for SRS; Individual schools. Unlike SRS, all sampling units do not have an equal chance of selection. Once the first case has been randomly selected, then according to the sampling interval chosen some cases have 100% chance of selection and some have 0%. Although different in design, the statistical qualities of a SS can be similar to a SRS. If a sampling frame is completely randomised, then taking every *k*<sup>th</sup> case will produce similar results to randomly selecting each case. Estimates and confidence intervals can be calculated based on the same assumptions as a SRS.

In practice, SS can be easier, faster, and less error prone to implement than SRS. In quality control procedures, for example, the investigator can simply select every *k*<sup>th</sup> item on a production line out of *x* total items to be manufactured on that day, rather than sampling from all items randomly at the end of the day. In survey research, researchers can sample every *k*<sup>th</sup> phone number, or door-knock every *k*<sup>th</sup> house, saving the time and resources required for an equivalent SRS (e.g. tracking down each house selected).

A disadvantage of SS is that not all sampling frames are divisible by the necessary sampling interval to attain a sample of a specific size. This is resolved by using a fractional interval (e.g. two rotating sampling intervals).

One characteristic of SS can be a disadvantage and an advantage depending on how it is applied. If the sampling frame is ordered then the sampling interval may systematically 'skip' elements from specific groups within the sampling frame. For example, if a sampling frame consists of husbands and wives, and the sampling interval is 2, then the sample will consist of only husbands or only wives, thereby systematically missing an entire group within the population being inferred to.

When the sampling frame is appropriate and organised in a meaningful way, this attribute can serve as an implicit form of stratification (i.e. elements selected in proportion to their frame representation). For example, a SS of a sampling frame organised by some time scale (e.g. months) is guaranteed to contain an equal spread of elements from all time periods within the sampling frame. This implicit stratification can make a SS more representative.

Proportionally Stratified Sampling (PSS)
========================================

Stratification was mentioned above in the section on SS. This referred to the fixed sampling interval taking elements from groups in proportion to the representation of those groups within that sampling frame (e.g. the more cases a certain group has, the more elements are taken from it). This is accomplished in a SS by ordering the sampling frame by a meaningful variable. What SS does implicitly through ordering, PSS does explicitly through targeted sampling.

By incorporating additional information about the composition of a population into the sampling method, PSS is able to 'stratify' the population into representative groups known as 'strata'. Once the population is divided across as many significant and internally homogeneous groups as appropriate (i.e. 'collectively exhaustive' of all elements), each strata of the population is individually sampled with a SRS or SS. That is, a PSS is in fact a merging of many smaller samples. In keeping with the time period example used to demonstrate SS stratification, and equivalent PSS method of stratifying by time would be to explicitly separate out the relevant time periods and collect individual samples from each. Other common stratifying variables include age and sex. Most any variable can be used provided:

-   The categories represent separate groups (one group for each element),
-   They are clearly definable with distinct boundaries of why a case would be or not be in a group, and;
-   They cover all population elements.

The reason this method is called 'Proportional' Stratified Sampling is because each stratum is sampled exactly in proportion to the representation of that stratum within the frame. A sample of a specified size will sample an identifiable fraction of the population (e.g. *n/N*). In PSS, the stratum, which may vary in size, have enough cases sampled from them such that were an equivalent sampling fraction calculated, not for the entire sampling frame but for each stratum alone, the fractions would identical. For example, a PSS with two strata would sample 20 elements from the first stratum of 100 elements and 10 elements from the second stratum of 50 elements. Despite each stratum representing a different proportion of the total 150 element (100+50=150) sampling frame, each stratum was still sampled at 20% of the elements residing within it. Moreover, the summed stratum samples, 30 elements (20+10=30), represents 20% of the total 150 element sampling frame. Hence PSS is a proportional sampling method wherein all elements have equal probably of selection.

PSS has several advantages. Firstly, and similar to a SS on an ordered frame, PSS ensures that groups have the same proportional representation within the sample as they do in the population. Secondly, this proportional representation is not fixed. Rather, it is set at the discretion of the researcher, meaning different strata can be sampled at different levels if those groups are of more or less interest experimentally (i.e. 'non'-proportional SS). Further to this point, not only can certain strata be 'oversampled', but in fact entirely different sampling methods can be used on each group. This allows greater sophistication in experimental design (e.g. in-person interviews of local 'urban' stratum schools, mail surveys of distance 'rural' stratum). Thirdly, sampling error is reduced because the sample is composed of many smaller samples of internally homogeneous sub-populations instead of one large sample of the relatively heterogeneous total population. Finally, by separating out sub-populations as a component of the sampling methodology, analysis of those sub-populations is streamlined.

Probability Proportional to Size Cluster Sampling (PPSCS)
=========================================================

This sampling method is more complex to analyse and plan, yet less costly to implement. The main characteristic of PPSCS is that the population of observation units (e.g. schools) is combined into groups or 'clusters' in some way. These clusters are then sampled and these form the first stage of the PPSCS. Once the clusters are selected, either all the observation units within each cluster are used or a sampling method (e.g. SRS) is applied to each individual cluster.

As a sampling method, the focus of PPSCS is on reducing the costs and difficulties associated with sampling, not the standard error. For example, if schools are clustered by suburb then when a certain clustered suburb is selected researchers can sample from the schools in that suburb. The PPSCS in this case places discrete geographic restrictions on the actual sampling operations. Sampling one discrete area requires fewer resources that a SRS alternative, which has no geographic restrictions and would require researchers to travel across the State tracking down randomly selected schools.

Despite being cheaper to implement, PPSCS usually produces a less representative population with a higher standard error. Error is higher because observation units in the same cluster are generally more homogeneous than those selected at random out of the total population. This within-cluster-homogeneity is often directly measured via the Intra-cluster Correlation Coefficient (*p*; 'rho'), which is closer to 1 (more homogeneous) when estimate precision is low and closer to 0 (less homogeneous) when precision is high. Aggregating observation units into clusters means that the sample loses information by being less 'spread' over the population, which is both the reason PPSCS requires less resources to implement and produces less representative samples. As the degree of error increase relates directly to how unrepresentative each cluster is to the population, this methodological weakness can be minimised with a diverse choice of clusters.

The 'Probability Proportional to Size' component of PPSCS refers to how clusters are selected and schools sampled. It means that the probability of a certain cluster being selected is determined by the size of that cluster relative to the total population size. Then, once all clusters have been selected on that basis, the same number of elements are sampled from each cluster regardless of how large of small each cluster is. This is an important distinction in cluster sampling because it means all observation units have an equal probability of selection (EPSEM). This is not the case for simpler cluster sampling versions that randomly select clusters and include all elements within each.

In the MySchool example, the primary sampling unit for PPSCS is groups of geographically close postcodes. The reason for choosing this criteria would be that by sampling clusters of schools that are geographically close, the PPSCS method will reduce the travel and time requirements associated with sample collection. As a 'two-way' cluster sample, a SRS would then be carried out on each sampled cluster.
